JAY MCKAY: Introducing
Accessibility to Existing Designs,
presented by, Katie Gleason,
Web Designer at WP Engine.
KATIE GLEASON: Hello,
thank you for joining me.
My name is Katie Gleason,
and I'm going to be talking
to you all today about how
to introduce accessibility
to an existing design team,
how we did it at WP Engine,
and giving you some tips
on how you can do it
with your own teams as well.
Like I said before,
my name is Katie.
I have short blonde hair.
I wear glasses; they
have green frames,
but the frames are really thin.
You can't really see them.
I'm currently wearing a tan
short sleeve button-down shirt,
and I have a sleeve of tattoos on
my right hand which you might see
as I use my hands to talk a lot.
Let's get into it.
I'm a web designer with the
storefront marketing team
at WP Engine.
I came into design by way of
psychology degree, and I've been
with WP Engine for
a couple years now.
At about this point last
year, actually,
my team identified accessibility
as an internal priority
and took steps to head up
this accessibility initiative
within our storefront site design.
I led that project, so I'm
going to give you a little info
on what we did and, hopefully,
give you some tips on what you can do
as well.
The first thing we identified
when we were talking
about accessibility was that the
storefront marketing team already had
an existing design system
that was being used for ads,
was being used for the site,
and had approval that went way over
just our team.
So, while that design system wasn't
made with accessibility in mind,
we realized that we would
have much more luck trying
to find accessible solutions
within that system than trying
to change the system entirely.
That did add a layer
of difficulty though.
The second thing we identified, our
second hurdle was that our team and,
me, specifically, I really
lacked the knowledge to identify
and solve accessibility problems
and issues that existed on our site.
I had always had a passion
about accessibility,
but I had never had any
certifications any training,
you know, I didn’t really
know where to start.
Then our third big hurdle was
that accessibility, itself,
is a lot more complicated
than this black-and-white view
of checking boxes off of a list.
While there is a standard
of various qualifications,
sites and designs have
to meet to be accessible.
Accessibility is about
a lot more than that,
and I wanted our accessibility
initiative to be stronger
than just checking boxes.
The first hurdle that I
tackled was education,
and with the support of my
team, I was able
to find a comprehensive
introductory course called,
Introduction to Web Accessibility
with W3Cx, and really educate myself
on the why of accessibility,
as well as the what.
Who are we designing for?
Why is it important that we
make these things accessible?
For this initial accessibility
push, you do not have
to become an expert
in accessibility.
That's not going to
happen overnight.
It’s certainly not going to
happen in two, four, six weeks.
You know, this initial
education is the very beginning
of what I consider to be a
lifelong learning process.
I'm about a year in, and I'm still
learning new things every day.
I plan on learning new things
every day for the rest of the time
that I do accessible design
which, hopefully, is a long time.
I really benefited from learning
the why's of accessibility
through this course,
because it not only helped me
better explain solutions
and situations to my team,
but then also later on down the line
when I'm presenting designs outside
of the team,
it helps give a good reason
for accessibility besides just,
This is the right thing to do
or this is the right way to do it.
Neither of which are really strong
arguments in and of themselves.
Following my education, we did an
initial audit of our site which,
you know, the best way to do
accessibility testing with users is
to actually do testing with users
with disabilities, you know,
and get feedback on how
they view your site.
Since our accessibility initiative
was really an internal push,
that wasn't an option.
We didn't have the support of a
dedicated research team to be able
to take the time and find the people
for this initial accessibility audit.
Right there, that was a hurdle
that we had to get past,
and we had to find
something that while it
may not have been necessarily
an equivalent testing method,
it was in the name of something
is better than nothing.
It was a start.
For our first audit, we identified
our main buyer journey the homepage
of our website and the
plans and pricing page.
We wanted to break it into a
manageable chunk because trying
to audit an entire website on your
first go round is really overwhelming
and to keep ourselves on track,
we wanted to be able to take it
in bite sized manageable chunks.
As the tester for this audit,
I ended up using a lot of tools
to be able to try to accurately
capture various different experiences
of our site.
Some of the tools I listed on here
some of the tools I used were Stark
for color contrast,
and also seeing what various types
of color blindness might
look like on our site.
Wave is really good for like a
macro view of the site as a whole
and identifying potential
accessibility issues such as
when images are missing alt text.
Axe DevTools was something I
would use to turn off this CSS
and the, you know,
the visuals on a site,
so I could see that semantic
structure in place and determine,
Does this logically makes sense?
You can obviously use the keyboard
and tab through the
whole page make sure
that makes sense,
and then I use a Mac,
and Apple has some good
accessibility settings
where you can actually test various
different accessible experiences
through their software.
I use that as well.
Following our audit, I compiled
a list of all of the issues
that I had identified in my
original audit, and we got together
as a team and there were some issues
that were fairly black-and-white
like color contrast.
There is not really like
a middle ground there.
It either meets the minimum
requirement or it doesn't.
Those were fairly straightforward to
fix since we could find other colors
within our existing design
system that were accessible
and met those color
contrast requirements.
What we had to do though
is we had to identify
these excess ability grey areas.
Areas where there may not
necessarily be a one correct answer.
For example, alt text on icons,
you can put alt text on icons but,
also, if they are decorative,
you don't necessarily have to.
We kind of had to go
into that thinking about
how can we provide an equivalent
experience for all of our users,
not necessarily the
exact same experience.
That's kind of where
the research comes in.
Once we identified those grey
areas, I did a lot of research
on potential solutions.
I brought these solutions
to the team, and we agreed
on our team’s design treatment for
these grey areas what we wanted
to do moving forward,
which I then documented
in a Google slides
document along with visuals
to help not only potential new
members on the team understand,
but also people outside the
team who may not have been there
from jump and may not
have seen everything
that we were going through.
The last thing that I feel like
is really important as far as,
you know, creating your accessible
design framework is identifying
a process to report new additions to
this framework and to this document.
You know,
are going to have a Google form?
Are you going to become the
point person that everybody comes
to every time they have some
sort of accessibility question?
If that's the case, how are you going
to record all of these questions
so that you can get to
them in a timely manner
without having to interrupt
your day every single time?
These are all questions that
you have to ask yourself
and things you have to decide
to help maintain this framework.
Once you’ve built the
framework, and you have achieved
the goals you set out to achieve,
you’ve redesigned some pages
and you are feeling great about
yourself, you may be wondering,
OK, what's next?
How do I keep this moving?
How do I maintain
this forward momentum?
Like I mentioned just a few
moments ago, you're going
to want to continue
updating this framework.
As you continue to go through just
your regular day-to-day design work,
you will find other either
existing accessible grey areas
or potentially, your team might
want to introduce a new component
like an animation or video
onto a page and you're like,
OK, how are we going to address
this accessibility wise?
By maintaining that framework
and that documentation,
you make it really easy for anybody
to use accessible design components
and make sure things are done
correctly the first time.
I've also found it really beneficial
to start introducing accessibility
into the reasoning portion
of my design presentations.
Like I mentioned when I was
talking about the education,
the why behind accessibility
is super important, not just
for your own benefit, but also for
the benefit for those around you.
Why is accessible design
important to a business case?
Who is accessible who is
this accessible design going
to be helping?
Really says a lot more than
just, We did it this way
because it's accessible.
You know, people would to
understand and people want
to grow their own knowledge,
and if you can really kind
of help evangelize accessibility
within your organization,
you would be shocked at how many
people you can get on board.
The last one, my last piece of advice
would be to pick the right times
to really dig your heels
in as far as accessibility.
You know, similar to a lot of
feedback you get on designs,
sometimes the accessible option
isn't going to be the one
that everybody likes the most.
In those situations,
you have options.
You can research potential
other accessible designs,
you can dig your heels in and
say, No, this is the best way
to do it, and I'm going to
stand by that or you can say,
You know what, OK,
we can have tooltips on this page,
but I am going to find a better way
to present the information you want
to present in an accessible way.
Whether you are making a stand
right then and there or going back
to your own personal drawing
board, you kind of have
to make those decisions
on the fly and on your own
with the support of your
team, obviously.
So, just in closing, accessibility
for me is a never-ending journey
of education and growth.
I found a lot of joy and a lot
of fulfillment in the beginning
of my accessibility journey,
and something that I would recommend
for everybody is to find a
community of people like all of you
who are passionate
about accessibility.
Whether that's an accessible
design group within your company
or just a group passionate about
accessibility anywhere like Facebook,
LinkedIn.
It doesn't really matter.
Find a group of people who are also
trying to further their education
and knowledge and growth and
y'all can help each other
and grow together and I really find
that that's incredibly beneficial.
Thank you so much for your time
today, and if you have any questions,
I am in the chat and should
be able to answer those.
Feel free to find me on
LinkedIn, and we can chat more.
Thanks, guys.